---
layout: post
title: "TFNP, or I know it's there, somewhere"
categories: math
---

Continuing on the [inapproximability of PPAD]({% post_url 2026-01-27-ppad %}), I want to examine other problems in the TFNP zoo. As I'm personally trying to make sense of this whole thing, we're first going to define TFNP formally.
I will try to read along the definitions provided in [1,2], and write down some examples to illustrate the definitions.

<div class="remark">
The following presentation is almost word-for-word taken from [1], with supposedly helpful commentary inserted by me from time to time. All errors are my own, but the good stuff comes from [1].
</div>

## Languages and Relations

We first pass through the defintions of (binary) relations defined on finite-length strings. This will help us precisely formulate the classes FNP and TFNP shortly.

Let $\Sigma$ be some alphabet - this is a finite set of symbols. For convenience, we can set it to be $$\{ 0, 1 \}$$. Then, let $$\Sigma^*$$ be the set of all finite length strings created using this alphabet. For example, $$ 001100 \in \Sigma^*$$ (This is the [Kleene star operator on this alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kleene_star)).

A Relation $$R \in \Sigma^* \times \Sigma^*$$ associates two strings $$x, y \in \Sigma^*$$. Notice that we define $$R$$ as a subset of the possible pairs of strings. The idea is that $$x$$ is _related_ to $$y$$ if and only if $$(x,y) \in R$$. 

A [Language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_language) is just a collection of strings in $$\Sigma^*$$.

For example, I consider the subset of $$\Sigma^*$$ of all numbers upto $8$ - this is just the set of all strings in $$\Sigma^*$$ with length at most 3. To illustrate the point, $$ 101 \in \Sigma^* $$, but $$1001 \not\in \Sigma^*$$. Then, I define $R$ as the relation "divisible by" i.e. $(x,y) \in R$ if and only if $x$ is divisible by $y$. For example, $(100, 010) \in R$.

## Polynomially Balanced/Computable Relations

We want to consider relations that are at least easy to evaluate. Clearly, we cannot consider _every_ possible relation on a language. Indeed, [1,2] consider _polynomially balanced_ and _polynomial-time computable/recognisable_ relations. First, we define the balanced relations.

<div class="defn" text="Polynomially Balanced Relation" markdown="1">
A relation $R$ is polynomially balanced $\iff$ $(x,y) \in R$ implies that $|y| \leq p(|x|)$, for some polynomial $p$.
</div>

The implications of this are quite direct; the "solution" $y$ cannot be exponentially bigger than the "input" $x$ for a polynomially balanced relation $R$. This also means that reading $y$ takes time at most polynomial in the size of $x$. Of course, the "divisible by" relation we have defined on our limited alphabet is polynomially balanced; in fact, reading any string in that language takes the same amount of time for this example.

Note that this does not say how much time it takes to verify $(x,y) \in R$. Even for  polynomially sized $|y| \leq p(|x|)$, if I need to read this exponentially many times to verify $R$, this is not efficient. This is where the polynomial time computability/recognisability kicks in.

<div class="defn" text="Polynomial-time computable Relation" markdown="1">
A relation $R$ is polynomial-time computable $\iff$ there exists some Turing machine that can decide in polynomial-time if $(x,y) \in R$ or not.
</div>

For our example, "divisible by", we can implement the integer division algorithm in a Turing machine. For $n$-bit numbers, this takes, say, $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$ time using [Schoolbook Long Division](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_complexity_of_mathematical_operation), which is a polynomial time procedure. Therefore, "divisible by" is a polynomial-time computable relation on this language.

On the other hand, if $y$ takes exponentially many bits to write, then the algorithm is forced to take exponential time to compute a response. This breaks any notion of efficiency that we may have in mind, so we want to exclude this case. This is why we need to consider the polynomially-balanced assumption as well.

Overall, the upshot with this restricted class of relations is that we can check a solution in polynomial time.

## Search Problems and Functional NP

We're [almost there](https://media3.giphy.com/media/v1.Y2lkPTc5MGI3NjExZG1xOHlpNXJpd2o3eGt5emhkOWJjeWhidG9oaHR2MmJ2amlqNGhhaSZlcD12MV9pbnRlcm5hbF9naWZfYnlfaWQmY3Q9Zw/xUOxfh6ZM75efM3Bqo/giphy.gif). We just need to define FNP; but this is straightforward now with the vocabulary we have. FNP is defined as the class of all problems of the following type.

<div class="defn" text="FNP Problem" markdown="1">
- **Input**: Let $R$ be a polynomially balanced and polynomial-time computable relation, and $$x \in \Sigma^*$$ be some string.
- **Output** Find any $y \in \Sigma^*$ such that $(x,y) \in R$, otherwise reply No.
</div>

There are some comparisions to make with NP, the more famous class of decision problems. FNP and NP both admit polynomial time verification of candidate solutions - we formalise it here via our polynomially balanced/computable relations. On the other hand, FNP explicitly requires us to output a solution. It is not sufficient to simply assert that a solution exists. This latter point is why NP is a class of decision problems, while FNP is a class of search problems.

<div class="remark">
While FNP is of independent interest, we will skim over this for a first pass.
</div>

## TFNP : Total FNP

[Finally](https://media4.giphy.com/media/v1.Y2lkPTc5MGI3NjExcWpvMnI3MjFteWR1ejNqYWJuZzR3aDl4em1xZWxxdTBnOXdhOG43dyZlcD12MV9pbnRlcm5hbF9naWZfYnlfaWQmY3Q9Zw/jQ3hdGZHoQvc0rGRAc/giphy.gif), we can define what TFNP is.

TFNP is the subset of FNP problems which are guaranteed to have a solution. In other words, for an FNP problem of the form we discussed, it will never output No. Formally, we specify that the relation used in the canonical FNP problem is _total_; this is defined as follows.

<div class="defn" text="Total Relations" markdown="1">
A relation $R$ is said to be total if for every $$x \in \Sigma^*$$, there is _always_ a $$y \in \Sigma^*$$ such that $(x,y) \in R$.
</div>

This gives us the definition of TFNP as "the class FNP restricted to total relations R"[1]. More precisely, TFNP is the set of all problems of the following type.

<div class="defn" text="TFNP Problem" markdown="1">
- **Input**: Let $R$ be a total, polynomially balanced and polynomial-time computable relation, and $$x \in \Sigma^*$$ be some string.
- **Output** Find any $y \in \Sigma^*$ such that $(x,y) \in R$.
</div>

## Why is this important ?

TFNP's importance comes from two things. The first part of this importance comes from the problems in TFNP. Among others, 

1. Finding $\varepsilon$-approximate Nash Equilibria in Bimatrix games is a PPAD-Complete, and PPAD is a subclass of TFNP [3].
2. Finding a Pure Nash Equilibrium of a potential game is PLS-complete, and PLS is a subclass of TFNP [4].
3. Performing Gradient Descent on a continuous function over a bounded domain is CLS-Complete, and CLS is yet another subclass of TFNP [5].

<div class="remark" text="PLS,CLS" markdown="1">
Before we get too acronym-happy, 

1. PLS, or Polynomial Local Search, captures the complexity of finding locally optimal solutions to NP-Hard optimisation problems.
2. CLS, or Continuous Local Search, is the set of problems in both PLS and PPAD (subject of the famous proof of [4]; prior to this paper, it was believed that CLS was a subset of PPAD $\cap$ PLS), and is therefore also a subset of TFNP.
</div>

On the non-game-theoretic front, 

1. Factoring integers is in TNFP, since every integer is guaranteed to have a unique factorisation ([Hello there](https://media0.giphy.com/media/v1.Y2lkPTc5MGI3NjExNmx4d2ZmN2cyYWZpeDdsY2R4OGl3NDR4MDl1bnljcXQzYXlkbjJjZCZlcD12MV9pbnRlcm5hbF9naWZfYnlfaWQmY3Q9Zw/Nx0rz3jtxtEre/giphy.gif), Algebra!) [1].

To conclude, some important problems are in this complexity class. 
The other half of the story is that these problems are comptuationally hard to solve. As discussed in [a previous post]({% post_url 2026-01-27-ppad %}), PPAD-complete problems are not approximable, even for (sufficiently small) constant approximation factors. A future post will discuss approximability in more detail for the other classes in this zoo. On the other hand, the hardness of integer factorisation is key to cryptography! 

In summary, a lot of computationally hard problems are in TFNP and this makes it an interesting class to study.

## Conclusion

We went through the definition of TFNP via relations and FNP. Interesting exercise, and since I haven't seen languages and their ilk since my Masters', it's good to revise things once in a while.

Otherwise, this sets up the stage nicely for the hardness of TFNP problems, which will be the subject of a future post.

--- 

#### References 

1. Meggido, Nimrod, and Christos H. Papadimitriou. "A note on total functions, existence theorems, and computational complexity." Tech. report, IBM, Tech. Rep. (1989).
2. Papadimitriou, Christos H. "On the complexity of the parity argument and other inefficient proofs of existence." Journal of Computer and system Sciences 48.3 (1994): 498-532.
3. Chen, Xi, Xiaotie Deng, and Shang-Hua Teng. "Settling the complexity of computing two-player Nash equilibria." Journal of the ACM (JACM) 56.3 (2009): 1-57. 
4. Babichenko, Yakov, and Aviad Rubinstein. "Settling the complexity of Nash equilibrium in congestion games." Proceedings of the 53rd annual ACM SIGACT symposium on theory of computing. 2021.
5. Fearnley, John, et al. "The complexity of gradient descent: CLS= PPAD∩ PLS." Journal of the ACM 70.1 (2022): 1-74.
